[WIP] Allow/Expose options to enable distributed tracing in components as features are added upstream (#725)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/distributed-tracing/distributed-tracing.md

---
title: distributed-tracing-with-opentelemetry
authors:
  - "@sallyom"
  - "@parulsingh"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2021-04-14
last-updated: 2021-06-09
status: informational
---

> # Distributed Tracing with OpenTelemetry

Reviewer: Is this only about instrumenting the components that are part of OpenShift? Or about adding distributed tracing capabilities in general? I'm asking because [kspan](https://github.com/weaveworks-experiments/kspan) has been mentioned as a nice tool to visualize Kubernetes events, but wouldn't be covered by this proposal here, as all it requires is a backend to send data to (Jaeger, for instance).

Author: I will be looking into kspan, I'll report back. As of now, it's only about instrumenting the components and/or turning on tracing for upstream components. If it makes sense, we can make it more broad and include use of kspan.

## Summary

This document is an overview of distributed tracing and how it benefits a distributed system
such as OpenShift. Also, this document provides information necessary
to configure distributed tracing in an OpenShift deployment with a vendor-agnostic collector
capable of exporting telemetry data to any back-end analysis tool. Some open-source back-ends
for OpenTelemetry data are Jaeger, Prometheus, and Zipkin. Here is a list of [vendors that currently support
OpenTelemetry.](https://opentelemetry.io/vendors/)

Distributed tracing has the ability to quickly detect and diagnose problems as well
as improve performance of distributed systems and  microservices. By definition,
distributed tracing tracks and observes service requests as they flow through a system by
collecting data as requests go from one service to another. It's possible, then, to
pinpoint bugs and bottlenecks or other issues that can impact overall system performance.
Simply put, tracing provides the story of an end-to-end request that is difficult to get otherwise.

OpenTelemetry supports a wire protocol `OTLP` over `gRPC`. `OTLP` is a request/response protocol. `OTLP`

> is used to send data to an `OpenTelemetry Collector` that can be configured to forward and export

Author: rephrased, thanks

data to any data analysis tool that supports OpenTelemetry.

## Motivation

As platforms and applications become more distributed and built on microservices or serverless, tracing
provides an overall picture of system performance. This visibility reveals service dependencies and how
one component affects another, things which are difficult to observe otherwise. For example, many OpenShift
bugs or issues are not contained to a single component. Instead, several teams and component owners often
work together to solve issues and make system improvements. Distributed tracing aids this by
tracking events across service boundaries. Furthermore, tracing can shrink the time it takes to diagnose issues,
giving useful information and pinpointing problems without the need for extra code. Upstream, etcd has been
instrumented to export gRPC traces. CRI-O is also adding instrumentation. There is an open PR with

> kubernetes-apiserver that will add opentelemetry tracing, and work has been underway to instrument kubelet

Author: fixed

and kube-scheduler as a POC. With these components instrumented, it will be possible to view traces with
CRI-O <-> Kubelet <-> Kube-Scheduler <-> Kube-Apiserver <-> ETCD. At this point, there is much to gain in instrumenting

> other components and extenting the opentelemetry train to give a complete view of the system.

Author: fixed

### Goals

Provide an easy way for OpenShift components to add instrumentation for distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry.

> Adding opentelemetry tracing spans requires only a few lines of code. The more components that add tracing,

Author: fixed

the more complete the picture will be for anyone who is debugging or trying to understand cluster performance.
Also, a vendor-agnostic OpenTelemetry operator available through the OpenShift operator hub can
be temporarily deployed in times of debugging to turn on tracing, and removed when no longer needed. Any component
that adds instrumentation should add a noop exporter and/or a switch to turn tracing on. It should be easy to enable
and disable tracing. When disabled, there will be no instrumentation. If enabled but no backend is detected, the
instrumentation will be removed, so that there will be no trace exporter connection errors in component logs.

### Non-Goals

The OpenTelemetry operator for OpenShift will not be part of core OpenShift. Instead, the operator is available
on the OperatorHub in the OpenShift Console.

## Proposal

This will be a living document that will be a record of adding tracing to CRI-O. The end
result will be a merged document that will serve as a guideline for anyone else who wishes to add tracing
to their components or applications.

### User Stories

> * As a cluster administrator, I want to easily switch on or off opentelemetry tracing.

Author: fixed, all of the opentelemetry typos, thanks

---
title: distributed-tracing-with-opentelemetry
authors:
  - "@sallyom"
  - "@husky-parul"
  - "@damemi"
reviewers:

>   - TBD

Reviewer 2: I think we'll need reviewers from the API server, etcd, and node teams.

approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2021-04-14
last-updated: 2021-10-11
status: informational
---

# Distributed Tracing with OpenTelemetry

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

OpenTelemetry tracing is an experimental feature added in etcd 3.5 and Kubernetes APIServer v1.22.
This enhancement proposal will add the option of enabling tracing features in OpenShift as they are
added upstream. Currently there is a KEP being targeted for Kubernetes 1.24 to add tracing instrumentation
in the kubelet, as well as in the main branch of CRI-O. Tracing can be added as an option in the OpenShift
deployment configurations for these components but will require minor updates to deployment manifests.

> In distributed systems tracing gives valuable data that logs and metrics cannot provide. This enhancement

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In distributed systems, tracing not only provides valuable data that logs and metrics cannot. It also simplifies the correlation between the different signals. This enhancement
```

Tracing provides the story of an end-to-end request that is difficult to get otherwise.

The OpenTelemetry Collector component can ingest data in OTLP format and be configured to forward
and export data to a variety of vendor-specific backends, as well as backends that can ingest data
in OTLP, Jaeger, or Zipkin formats.

## Motivation

As platforms and applications become more distributed and built on microservices or serverless, tracing
provides an overall picture of system performance. This visibility reveals service dependencies and how
one component affects another, things which are difficult to observe otherwise. For example, many OpenShift
bugs or issues are not contained to a single component. Instead, several teams and component owners often
work together to solve issues and make system improvements. Distributed tracing aids this by
tracking events across service boundaries. Furthermore, tracing can shrink the time it takes to diagnose issues,
giving useful information and pinpointing problems without the need for extra code. Upstream, etcd has been
instrumented to export gRPC traces. CRI-O is also adding instrumentation. Kubernetes API server added the option

> to enable OpenTelemetry tracing in version 1.22. A KEP is under review and work is underway to instrument kubelet.

Reviewer 3: > A KEP is under review and work is underway to instrument kubelet.

Generally coming in v1.27, right?

A POC has been created with kube-scheduler. With these components instrumented, it will be possible to view traces with
CRI-O <-> Kubelet <-> Kube-Apiserver <-> ETCD. At this point, there is much to gain in instrumenting

> other components and extending the OpenTelemetry train to give a complete view of the system.

Author: I will clarify that within the proposal, thanks!

### Goals

Provide an easy way for OpenShift components to add instrumentation for distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry.
Adding OpenTelemetry tracing spans requires only a few lines of code. The more components that add tracing,
the more complete the picture will be for anyone who is debugging or trying to understand cluster performance.
Also, a vendor-agnostic OpenTelemetry Collector with an operator in the works on OperatorHub can be
temporarily deployed in times of debugging to turn on tracing, and removed when no longer needed. Any component
that adds instrumentation should add a switch to turn tracing on. It should be easy to enable
and disable tracing. If enabled but no backend is detected, there should be no performance hit or trace exporter
connection errors in component logs.

### Non-Goals

The OpenTelemetry Collector operator for OpenShift will not be part of core OpenShift. Instead, the operator is available

> on the OperatorHub in the OpenShift console, or, can be deployed manually.

Reviewer 2: Which team will be maintaining that operator?

Reviewer 3: Aside from Operatorhub there is also a [packaged operator from RH](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/distr_tracing/distr_tracing_install/distr-tracing-deploying-otel.html).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

OpenTelemetry Collector and Jaeger operators are currently available on the OperatorHub in the OpenShift Console.
Adding the experimental tracing flags and enabling the tracing feature-gate in etcd and kube-APIServer is only
half of what is required to collect trace data. The other piece is to document the deployment of the
OpenTelemetry Collector as well as best practices when exporting data to a tracing analysis backend.

### Risks and Mitigations

There is a slight performance hit when collecting trace data. Instrumentation wraps HTTP and gRPC calls to generate
and export OTLP data, and this consumes CPU and memory. The cost can be minimized by configuring the collectors, processors,
and exporters. Because of this tracing should not be enabled by default and the performance should be closely monitored in
environments where tracing is switched on to better understand the cost vs. the benefit of collecting traces.

## Design Details

### Etcd

* Document how to configure etcd to export traces and how to switch tracing on & off

### Kube APIServer

> * Add the TracingConfiguration file flag to OpenShift

Reviewer 2: What will create the configuration file, the new operator?
